---
created: '2022-05-01T00:00:00.000Z'
desc: ''
id: cc6yf788go5tr4ircysyz82
tags:
- swipes
title: 2022-03-17 01-46-43
updated: 1652786940545
---
   
Interesting take but I feel it leaves some things out.   
   
"The Christmas Game" is conjured by his mother.   
   
What is a mother's duty? To see her beloved son grow from a boy to a man. The film is about Initiation.    
   
Gawain is a typical manboy, into alcohol and fornication and unsure if he wants to be a knight. When the King asks him his deeds he has nothing to share of import. He is envious of the legends of the Round Table but uncertain he could live up to their deeds. Uninitiated.    
   
The Green Knight is his opportunity. The Legends in the room stand back from the task. They are Initiated and have no need to prove themselves. The call was always to Gawain.    
   
As others have pointed out, he makes the most dire cut he can -- and is celebrated. Severing the head from the body can echo circumcision or the painful detachment boys must go through to "kill the boy" inside in order to give birth to the mature man. The Initiated men would have scorned him if he'd just given the Knight a tiny scratc...le immediately, realizing he is derelict in his duty. This is what gives him the motivation to enter the Yellow Wood.    
   
His mother watches him through the familiar fox, and tries to scare him off the Final Initiation, back into a life of comfort. But his experience with the Lady has given him the courage to see it through.    
   
He waits patiently at the feet of the Green Knight, displaying the patience that is necessary to persist through challenges (Initiation is not Immediate). Finally we see the final drama unfold in his head and he answers the call that the Queen gave him and that his Mother so hoped he would answer: he has courage. When he finally removes the sash, he faces certain Death with a clear and calm mind, and he is Initiated.   
   
His life or death at the chronological end of the film is irrelevant which is why we never see the axe fall (or be stayed) via — Gawain has become a Knight. The tale of Initiation is complete. Roll credits.(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FIM94dRlKWc)